.\" Man page for PHPMate
.\" Generated for PHPMate 1.1.0
.TH PHMATE 1 "July 13, 2025" "PHPMate 1.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
phmate \- PHP Built-in Server Manager for local development
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B phmate
.I COMMAND
[
.I OPTIONS
]
[
.I HOSTNAME:PORT
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B PHPMate
is a lightweight command-line utility designed to simplify the management of PHP's built-in web server for local development. It provides an intuitive interface for starting, stopping, and configuring PHP's built-in web server with various options including document root and custom PHP router script files.
.PP
PHPMate requires PHP 8.0 or higher to be installed. Logging verbosity can be controlled by setting the
.B LOG_LEVEL
environment variable to one of DEBUG, INFO, WARNING, or ERROR (default: INFO). The
.B \-\-debug
option is a convenience that sets
.B LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG
for a single command.
.PP
PHPMate features automatic router script detection: if no explicit
.B \-\-router
option is provided, it will automatically look for and use a
.B router.php
file in the document root directory if one exists.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B start
.B phmate start
[
.I OPTIONS
]
[
.I HOSTNAME:PORT
]
.br
Start the PHP built-in web server (default: localhost:8000).
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-docroot=PATH
Set document root directory (default: current directory).
.TP
.B \-\-php=PATH
Specify PHP binary
.TP
.B \-\-php-ini=PATH
Specify custom PHP ini file.
.TP
.B \-\-profile=NAME
Use specific configuration profile (default: default).
.TP
.B \-\-router=FILE
Set custom PHP router script file (file path). If not specified, PHPMate will automatically look for
.B router.php
in the document root directory.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable debug logging (sets LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG).
.RE
.TP
.B stop
.B phmate stop
[
.I OPTIONS
]
.br
Stop the running PHP server.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-profile=NAME
Use specific configuration profile (default: default).
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable debug logging (sets LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG).
.RE
.TP
.B restart
.B phmate restart
[
.I OPTIONS
]
[
.I HOSTNAME:PORT
]
.br
Restart the PHP server.
.RS
Options: Same as for the
.B start
command.
.RE
.TP
.B status
.B phmate status
[
.I OPTIONS
]
.br
Show server status.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-profile=NAME
Use specific configuration profile (default: default).
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable debug logging (sets LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG).
.RE
.TP
.B wizard
.B phmate wizard
[
.I OPTIONS
]
.br
Interactive setup to configure server settings. Prompts for saving the configuration and starting the server default to "yes" (Y).
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-profile=NAME
Use specific configuration profile (default: default).
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable debug logging (sets LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG).
.RE
.TP
.B config
.B phmate config
[
.I OPTIONS
]
.br
Show current configuration.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-profile=NAME
Use specific configuration profile (default: default).
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable debug logging (sets LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG).
.RE
.TP
.B help
.B phmate help
.br
Display the help information.
.TP
.B version
.B phmate version
.br
Show version information.
.SH ROUTER SCRIPT AUTO-DETECTION
PHPMate automatically detects and uses a
.B router.php
file in the document root directory if the following conditions are met:
.PP
.RS
1. No explicit
.B \-\-router
option is provided
.br
2. A file named
.B router.php
exists in the document root directory
.br
3. The
.B router.php
file is readable
.RE
.PP
The explicit
.B \-\-router
option always takes precedence over auto-detection. When a router script is auto-detected, PHPMate will log this information for transparency.
.SH EXAMPLES
Start a server on the default port:
.EX
phmate start
.EE
Start a server on a specific port:
.EX
phmate start localhost:8080
.EE
Start a server with a custom document root (auto-detects router.php):
.EX
phmate start \-\-docroot=/path/to/www
.EE
Start a server with an explicit router script:
.EX
phmate start \-\-router=custom_router.php
.EE
Start a server using a specific PHP version:
.EX
phmate start \-\-php=/usr/bin/php8.1
.EE
Start a server with a custom PHP ini file:
.EX
phmate start \-\-php-ini=/etc/php/8.1/php.ini
.EE
Use a named configuration profile:
.EX
phmate start \-\-profile=dev
.EE
Interactively configure the server:
.EX
phmate wizard
.EE
Check server status:
.EX
phmate status
.EE
Stop the server:
.EX
phmate stop
.EE
Show current configuration:
.EX
phmate config
.EE
Show version information:
.EX
phmate version
.EE
.SH ROUTER SCRIPT EXAMPLES
A basic router script that serves static files directly and routes other requests to index.php:
.EX
<?php
// router.php
if (preg_match('/\\.(png|jpg|jpeg|gif|css|js)$/', $_SERVER["REQUEST_URI"])) {
    return false; // Serve the file as-is
} else {
    include_once 'index.php'; // Route to main application
}
.EE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/phmate/config_PROFILE
Configuration file for each profile. PROFILE is the profile name (default: default).
.TP
.I ~/.config/phmate/phmate.pid
PID file for the running server.
.TP
.I ~/.config/phmate/phmate.log
Log file for PHPMate operations and PHP server output.
.TP
.I router.php
Auto-detected router script file in the document root directory.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
0
Success
.TP
1
Failure
.TP
2
Invalid command-line option
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.TP
.B PHMATE_CONFIG_DIR
Override default configuration directory (~/.config/phmate).
.TP
.B LOG_LEVEL
Set logging verbosity (DEBUG, INFO, WARNING, ERROR; default: INFO).
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel Zilli
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR php (1),
.BR lsof (8),
.BR ss (8)
.PP
The
.B ss
command is preferred for port checking, with
.B lsof
used as a fallback.
.SH LICENSE
MIT License